Create 09-03-22_writeup.md (#143)
very-good-science/data-ethics-club: site/contents/write_ups/2022/09-03-22_writeup.md

### In your opinion, is there a valid argument that lethal autonomous weapons could reduce negative outcomes? Is this different for civilians versus soldiers?

It's clear that several things that are wrong with it. Most people wars only stop when enough people are killed. 

Will autonomous weapons be able to distinguish/discriminate people? What about so called grey zone conflicts? There are a lot of areas where you don't really know if its a conflict. Categorising anything qualitative is problematic, but here the stakes are considerably higher. Is someone carrying a gun a soldier? A knife? Will the robots detect armbands correctly? Maybe we'll end up using our fitbits to declare which side we're on. If drones were accurate at telling the difference between military and civilians, that could be a positive thing. But civilians also take up arms. This would change warfare - military would wear civilian clothes (you also see civilias wearing camo). Humans are bad at distinguishing between civilians and military targets. Is it better to have a human behind it so that at least they might feel some guilt if something goes wrong?

> Putting anything into numbers runs into this problem. This isn't an optimisationg problem, this is life or death. What training sets of data for machine learning systems? How do you come up with performance metrics? You almost encode some sort of morality by setting objective functions. It will lead to very imbalanced wars. Again we fall onto the problem of trying to decide which wars are more or less ethical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Putting anything into numbers runs into this problem. This isn't an optimisation problem, this is life or death. What training sets of data are used for these machine learning systems? How do you come up with performance metrics? You almost encode some sort of morality by setting objective functions. It will lead to very imbalanced wars. Again we fall onto the problem of trying to decide which wars are more or less ethical.
```

There has been [research about drone operators in recent wars](https://jmvh.org/article/eye-in-the-sky-understanding-the-mental-health-of-unmanned-aerial-vehicle-operators/):

“Incidence rates for PTSD were 0.9 per 1000 persons for drone pilots (n=3, 95% CI 0.3-2.7) compared to 0.7 (n=20, 95% CI 0.4-1.0) for manned aircraft pilots. After adjustment, it was it was found that both groups had statistically equivalent rates of mental health outcomes despite self-reports of high levels of stress and fatigue reported among drone pilots.” (Otto and Webber)

People tell themselves moral stories to justify working in these industries. We wondered about how living in a different country (e.g. one that experiences war or is closer to it) might end up with people having [different opinions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategic_Defense_Initiative). Often times weapon mongers to the world (such as the British) provide weapons to other countries but don't experience the destruction that these weapons cause. People who work in weapons research companies very rarely talk about the casualities that come from that area. You can work in these areas without ever thinking about the outcomes. 

> If we are to have people in positions to bring such destruction and devastation into the world, we need those people to have a clear understanding of the moral implications of their decisions. Someone like [Stanislav Petrov](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanislav_Petrov) is often credited as having "saved the world".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we are to have people in positions to bring such destruction and devastation into the world, we need those people to have a clear understanding of the moral implications of their decisions. Someone like [Stanislav Petrov](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanislav_Petrov) is often credited as having "saved the world" after correctly interpreting an accidental fire by the enemy force, and possibly preventing a nuclear war.
```

## Who do you think would be held responsible for the implementation of a lethal autonomous weapon? 

> Maybe we would have fewer and fewer software developers? We don't want to encourage people to come into my profession (like some soldiers). This is already happening "Project Maven" DOD Project. The remit of this project was to develop certain advanced technology for defensive capabilities (e.g. developing computer vision software for identifying targets for drones). The company that initially won the contract was Google. Widespread protests which lead to Google ethical projects. Most developers didn't want to do this. DOD gave the contract to Palantir (tech company that mostly do government contracts; tracking systems, military applications etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maybe we would have fewer and fewer software developers? We don't want to encourage people to come into the defence technology profession (like some soldiers). This is already happening "Project Maven" DOD Project. The remit of this project was to develop certain advanced technology for defensive capabilities (e.g. developing computer vision software for identifying targets for drones). The company that initially won the contract was Google. Widespread protests which lead to Google ethical projects. Most developers didn't want to do this. DOD gave the contract to Palantir (tech company that mostly do government contracts; tracking systems, military applications etc).
```

> One of the problems with the free market means that someone will always do this job (same with like garbage collectors etc.) How do you uninvent these things? Evidence that CBRN weapons have been reduced in usage so maybe there is hope? Even if someone people will still produce them, other regulations will reduce the demand. (we're a good 5-20 years from the demand dropping for AI warfare, it's just such a cool gizmo to show off)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the problems with the free market means that someone will always do this job, and there is money in it. How do you uninvent these things? Evidence that CBRN weapons have been reduced in usage so maybe there is hope? Even if someone people will still produce them, other regulations will reduce the demand. (we're a good 5-20 years from the demand dropping for AI warfare, and hopefully for now it's just such a cool gizmo to show off).
```

## What change would you like to see on the basis of this piece? Who has the power to make that change?

How necessary/unavoidable is war and in what sense? 

It could be a question of when is it okay for a computer to make a decision versus a human: for accountability reasons it should be a human who makes decisions about e.g. employment or killing someone. Various pieces of media examine this idea in a more general setting. Some ask: [If we cannot hold computers accountable, should we be allowing them to make management decisions?](https://mobile.twitter.com/USC_ISI/status/1486770984443072516/photo/1). Others might ask, based on the way we make decisions: [Are You a Robot?](https://anchor.fm/are-you-a-robot/episodes/S7E1-Killer-Robots--Wanda-Muoz--Richard-Moyes-e12op43).

> We were disappointed that the legal aspect was treated by the speaker as if it's essentially a solved problem: if there was criminal intent then it will prosecuted that way, or criminal negligence it would be settled the other day. Plausible deniability/anonymity of drones is one possible attractive element to them, in a similar manner to how algorithms are sometimes used to deflect accountability when making decisions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We were disappointed that the legal aspect was treated by the speaker as if it's essentially a solved problem: if there was criminal intent then it will prosecuted that way, or criminal negligence it would be settled. Plausible deniability/anonymity of drones is one possible attractive element to them, in a similar manner to how algorithms are sometimes used to deflect accountability when making decisions.
```
